“You think, not God’s thoughts,
but those of men.”
Has that ever happened to us?
When is it particularly dangerous to do so?
Well, the text for today is based
on the events of Matthew 16:21-23,
and let’s read that together.
Matthew 16:21:
“From that time forward,
Jesus began explaining to his disciples
“that he must go to Jerusalem
and suffer many things
“from the elders and chief priests
and scribes and be killed,
“and on the third day be raised up.
“At this Peter took him aside
and began to rebuke him, saying:
“‘Be kind to yourself, Lord;
“you will not have
this happen to you at all.’
“But turning his back, he said to Peter:
‘Get behind me, Satan!
“‘You are a stumbling block to me,
because you think,
not God’s thoughts, but those of men.’”
Now, Jesus here had just expressed
real events that were
going to take place.
It says that “from that time forward,”
he began to explain them.
From this account and parallel accounts,
we see he began
to talk about what was going to happen,
where they were going to go,
and what would happen to him,
perhaps even what was
going to happen to the apostles.
But what did Peter say?
He, in effect, said:
‘No, no, Jesus. No, no, you’re wrong.
‘You’re not thinking right.
You’re overreacting.
Nothing is going to happen.’
Now, while Peter
took the brunt of the counsel,
the parallel account in Mark chapter 8
indicates that perhaps
the other apostles
thought the same way.
See, they found that what Jesus
was saying was hard to believe.
Now, what was the problem?
These were not wicked men.
These were spiritual men.
But the problem was
that at that moment,
they were using human reasoning
—thoughts of men—
rather than realizing that Jesus
was expressing God’s thoughts.
Now, Jesus immediately
corrected their thinking.
See, at this crucial time,
he needed Peter and the apostles,
not in front of him as stumbling blocks,
but behind him as willing supporters.
At this time, Jesus needed
supporters, not distracters.
And the apostles
obviously got the message.
And there’s no indication that Jesus
ever had to counsel them like that again.
In fact, at Luke 22:28,
Jesus even commended them and said:
“You are the ones
who have stuck with me in my trials.”
See, they learned
a very valuable lesson.
And what was that?
That lesson was this:
Trust Jehovah,
and trust the channel
that Jehovah is using.
And if they did that,
they would be thinking God’s thoughts.
And they also learned
that it was imperative that they did so,
especially as pressures mounted
as they got closer
to the end of Jesus’ ministry.
Well, how about us?
How do we do?
Do we think thoughts of men?
Or do we think God’s thoughts?
Well, no doubt all of us struggle at times.
I know I do.
I’m very sure that at times Jesus
would like to say to me,
or perhaps he does, ‘Rob, you’re
thinking, not thoughts of God but,
rather, thoughts of men’ because of
how I react to things at times.
And no doubt we all do that.
And we have to be careful, though,
because events and pressures at times
can cause us to only see things
through the perspective of humans
—human thinking.
Now, when would that be
particularly dangerous?
Well, when you think about it,
it’s very easy to trust Jehovah
and his representatives
when things are going well.
It’s also quite easy to trust Jehovah
and the channel he’s using
when things are obvious.
But it’s not always so easy to do
when things become confusing
or when things start to get more dire.
We may think of the nation of Israel
as they were getting ready
to leave Egypt.
If you look at Exodus chapter 11,
notice chapter 11 and verse 3.
It says: “And Jehovah gave the people
favor in the eyes of the Egyptians.
“Moreover, Moses himself
had become highly esteemed
“in the land of Egypt
among Pharaoh’s servants
and among the people.”
The interesting thing is at this time,
the Israelites and the Egyptians
had already seen the nine plagues.
It was obvious
that something was going on,
and many were willing to follow Moses
—do exactly what he said.
If you look in chapter 12,
we see Moses giving direction:
stay in your homes,
what to eat, how to cook it, how to eat it.
Look at chapter 12 and verse 50,
and it says: ‘The Israelites did
just as Moses commanded.’
See, at this point, they were sure
this tenth plague was going to happen.
There’s no record of any dissent,
any argument, with Moses
—complete obedience,
willing submission.
But now, what about as things
got a little more confusing?
got more dire?
What about
when they appeared shortly thereafter
to be trapped by the Red Sea?
Look over to chapter 14,
verses 11 and 12:
“They said to Moses:
“‘Is it because there are no burial places
in Egypt that you have brought us here
“‘to die in the wilderness?
“‘What have you done to us
by leading us out of Egypt?
“‘Is this not the very thing
we told you in Egypt when we said,
“‘“Let us alone, so that
we may serve the Egyptians”?
For it is better for us to serve the
Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.’”
My, what a difference!
‘What have you done to us?
You don’t know what you’re doing.
We’re all going to die.’
See, they began looking at things
from man’s perspective, not God’s.
What’s the lesson?
Well, the lesson is
that as pressures mount,
we need to continue to make sure
that we are thinking God’s thoughts.
We need to continue to trust the channel
that Jehovah is using.
Now, these events
over the past few months
have reminded us,
have shown us (demonstrated),
how quickly the world can change.
Now, from one minute, it’s riding high.
The next minute, it’s in panic;
it’s in turmoil.
We’ve also seen
how quickly our lives can change.
From one minute,
we’re with our congregations;
we’re serving Jehovah;
we’re working, going on vacations,
traveling to assignments,
and suddenly, everything has stopped.
How did we do?
Well, it’s so encouraging to see
how well the organization
has responded
—completely supporting
the adjustments made
and rallying behind all the changes
to make them work.
Continue to have that resolve.
Trust Jehovah;
trust the channel
that Jehovah is using.
But again, it’s relatively easy to do that
when the situation
is obvious, such as it is now.
But what happens
if things get more confusing?
get more dire?
We know, according to Bible prophecy,
at some point in the future
that is going to happen.
See, it’s at that time
we need to be extra careful
that we do not rely
on man’s thinking—human reasoning.
Why?
Because we cannot trust
human reasoning,
but we can rely on Jehovah’s direction.
And to illustrate that, for me,
I always think of two of the attacks
and the contrasts
of two of the attacks on Jerusalem.
And in both situations, it was dire.
It was confusing.
They were trapped.
It looked like they were going to die.
Remember the one
when the Assyrians came
against Jerusalem in Hezekiah’s time.
The direction through Isaiah the prophet
was very, very clear.
It was this:
Do not go to Egypt for support,
and do not surrender to the Assyrians.
Now, you remember from our drama
and from the Bible account that
that went against human reasoning.
They wanted to appeal to Egypt.
Some did use Egypt for support.
Others thought,
‘Well, maybe if we surrender,
the Assyrians will be kind to us.’
But Jehovah’s direction was clear.
What happened?
They followed the direction,
and they lived.
Now, later on when the Babylonians
came against Jerusalem,
again Jehovah’s direction through
Jeremiah the prophet was very clear:
Do not go to Egypt for support,
but do surrender to the Babylonians.
And again, that went
completely against human reasoning.
They were so mad
they wanted to kill Jeremiah.
They wanted to go to Egypt for support.
They eventually did.
They definitely did not want
to surrender to the Babylonians,
maybe even thinking back
to Hezekiah’s time
when they were commanded
not to do that.
What happened?
They did not follow the direction,
with tragic results.
So, what’s the lesson?
The lesson is that in both cases,
survival depended on trusting
the channel Jehovah was using
and following that direction,
even when it went against
human reasoning—popular opinion.
Well, what about today?
Well, we do not know where these
events, current events, are heading.
This may just be another marker in time
and an event in history or not.
But what we do know
is that these events illustrate
how quickly the world
can become unglued
and become completely
“faint out of fear.”
And we also know that
just as Jesus needed
the full support of his apostles
as it got closer to the end of his life,
the same is needed today
as we get closer to the end.
The Governing Body,
our Branch Committees,
the brothers who are taking the lead
—they need our support.
They need us, not as stumbling blocks,
not as distracters, but fully behind them.
So dear brothers and sisters,
we say to you to continue to do
exactly what you have been doing.
Stay calm.
Stay united.
Trust Jehovah,
and trust the channel Jehovah is using.
And if we do, we will be thinking
Jehovah’s thoughts
and not those of men.